Tutorial for sensor based cross compiled toochain on riscv example (#4201)
mlpack/mlpack: doc/tutorials/movement_recognition.md

[mlpack examples repository](https://github.com/mlpack/examples), under
[`cpp/movement_recognition/`](https://github.com/mlpack/examples/tree/master/cpp/movement_recognition).

Contents:

 * [What are we building](#what-are-we-building)
 * [Hardware](#hardware)
 * [Setting up the cross-compilation toolchain](#setting-up-the-cross-compilation-toolchain)
 * [Getting the example](#getting-the-example)
 * [Building the programs](#building-the-programs)
 * [Copying everything to the device](#copying-everything-to-the-device)
 * [Running it on the device](#running-it-on-the-device)
 * [Annex A: shrinking the binary (image and audio support)](#annex-a-shrinking-the-binary-image-and-audio-support)
 * [Annex B: making OpenBLAS fit (so training runs on the device)](#annex-b-making-openblas-fit-so-training-runs-on-the-device)

### What are we building

We are building a machine learning based human movement recognition pipeline to detect
movements such as walking, sitting, squats, and climbing stairs. This
is enabled by using a 9 Degree of Freedom inertial sensor that is read over an I2C bus.
The collected data is cut into windows, and then fed into a Fast Fourier

> Transform (FFT) in order to extract the features from each collected windows.

Reviewer: I feel like the word "FFT" is so widely used that you can just write FFT instead of the entire acronym.  I suspect the vast majority of people reading this page will be familiar---or at least know how to look up what it means if they aren't. :)

Finally, we build a small `float32` neural network that learns to recognize the
movements with the highest possible accuracy.

The example is split into four small independent programs, each of which
performs a single task:

 * `imu_test`: sensor check + magnetometer calibration

>  * `collect`: record sensor data to CSV (small, exception-free)

Reviewer: What does `(small, exception-free)` add to the description here?  It seems irrelevant to me.

 * `train`: train a neural network from the CSVs
 * `infer`: live inference from the IMU

All four are built from one CMake project that uses the same cross-compilation
infrastructure described in the [embedded example tutorial](../embedded/crosscompile_example.md).

The pipeline is:

 * `collect` writes one CSV file per recording (the file name is the label),
 * `train` turns those CSVs into FFT features and fits a network, and
 * `infer` reads the live sensor stream and prints the predicted movement.

The figure below shows that feature pipeline on the real recorded data, from
raw signal to the features the network learns from:

<center>

> <img src="../img/movement_fft_pipeline.png" width="720" alt="Movement-recognition FFT feature pipeline: raw recording, overlapping sliding windows, and per-movement FFT power spectra" />

Reviewer: I appreciate the inclusion of alt-text and a width here and for the other images; but: we need to ensure that the widths used here aren't too wide for the enclosing page.  You'll need to check the css styling for the actual website to see how wide the column is and go from there.  Once you've done that, then, I would say... no need to keep the image at its full resolution, just resize it to what we're using.

   However, it is kept as part of the features used for training.

### Hardware

This tutorial uses a [Milk-V Duo](https://milkv.io/duo), a SOPHGO
CV1800B board with a dual-core RISC-V C906 CPU and 64 MB of RAM (of which
only ~28 MB is usable from Linux), running a musl-based Linux.  The sensor is a
GY-89 10-DOF breakout, which carries three separate I2C chips:

| Chip        | Function                            | 7-bit address |
|-------------|-------------------------------------|---------------|
| L3GD20H | 3-axis gyroscope                    | `0x6B`        |
| LSM303D | 3-axis accelerometer + magnetometer | `0x1D`        |
| BMP180  | barometric pressure + temperature   | `0x77`        |

Wire the GY-89 to the Duo's I2C0 bus (the example defaults to `/dev/i2c-0`), as
shown below:

<center>
<img src="../img/wiring_gy89_duo.png" width="760" alt="Wiring the GY-89 IMU breakout to the Milk-V Duo over I2C0: SCL to pin 1 (GP0), SDA to pin 2 (GP1), VIN to pin 36 (3V3 out), and GND to pin 38" />
</center>

On the Duo, pins 1 and 2 (GP0 and GP1) are general-purpose GPIO pins by default,
so we must mux them to the I2C0 controller (their `IIC0_SCL` and `IIC0_SDA`

> functions).  This is done on the device with `duo-pinmux` and is shown in

Reviewer: One of the really important things about writing a good tutorial document is not introducing concepts before they are used.  Of course there are some things we have to assume that the reader already knows, but where we can't assume that, then we either need to introduce them or not mention that.  Here I am referring to the `(their IIC0_SCL and IIC0_SDA functions)` parenthetical: I don't think readers will know specifically what those functions are, and I don't know if it's important that they do.  So I might suggest just removing that parenthetical, unless you think pointing out specifically what functions pins 1 and 2 are doing is important---in which case, it's probably worth more than a parenthetical and a little bit of introduction to those functions.

[Running it on the device](#running-it-on-the-device). Feel free to check
pinmux software on the Duo to change the functionality of the pins and use a
different interface.

> 

Reviewer: Should we also add a little bit about the image to be used for the Milk-V and how to flash it?  Perhaps just a link to the relevant Milk-V documentation will work.  Alternately, maybe that should go up at the top in the bullet point links to other documentation?  ("How to set up your Milk-V" or something?)

### Setting up the cross-compilation toolchain

Since the device is resource constrained with only 28 MB available
RAM, we cross-compile on a host `x86_64` machine and copy the static
binaries on the target machine, exactly as we did in the [Raspberry Pi tutorial](../embedded/crosscompile_armv7.md).
The board uses a RISC-V C906 core, so we need a `riscv64-lp64d`
[Bootlin](https://toolchains.bootlin.com/) toolchain.  Our target in this tutorial to produce

> a small static binary, therefore, we use the musl variant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a small static binary; therefore, we use the musl variant:
```

```sh
wget https://toolchains.bootlin.com/downloads/releases/toolchains/riscv64-lp64d/tarballs/riscv64-lp64d--musl--stable-2025.08-1.tar.xz
tar -xvf riscv64-lp64d--musl--stable-2025.08-1.tar.xz
```

For the rest of the tutorial we refer to the unpacked toolchain through a shell
variable; adjust the path to where you extracted it:

```sh
export TC=/path/to/riscv64-lp64d--musl--stable-2025.08-1
```

The C906's architecture is `RV64GCV`, and that architecture's toolchain prefix/sysroot
are listed on the [cross-compilation setup page](../embedded/supported_boards.md#rv64gcv).

### Getting the example

Clone the examples repository and move into the example directory:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/mlpack/examples.git
cd examples/cpp/movement_recognition
```

### Building the programs

> All four programs build from one CMake project.  `imu_test` and `collect`
> only need the Linux I2C headers, while `train` and `infer` link mlpack; CMake
> reuses the repository's embedded cross-compile infrastructure (`CMake/`) to fetch
> mlpack and its dependencies and cross-compile OpenBLAS, as described in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All four programs build from one CMake project.  `imu_test` and `collect`
only need the Linux I2C headers, while `train` and `infer` link mlpack.  CMake
reuses the repository's embedded cross-compile infrastructure (`CMake/`) to fetch
mlpack and its dependencies and cross-compile OpenBLAS, as described in the
```

The semicolon seems incorrect to me since the two parts of the sentence aren't really related.  Also I am not sure I understand the second part: which repository is it reusing?  And how is it reusing it and not just using it?  I thought it just used `mlpack.cmake` to do all of the things that you listed, so, maybe it is better to just write that?

> [embedded example tutorial](../embedded/crosscompile_example.md).  At this stage, we need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[embedded example tutorial](../embedded/crosscompile_example.md).  When running CMake, we need to
```

define the architecture of the target device with the `ARCH_NAME=RV64GCV`
variable (the ISA of the board's C906 core):

```sh
mkdir build && cd build
cmake \
    -DCMAKE_CROSSCOMPILING=ON \
    -DARCH_NAME=RV64GCV \
    -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=../CMake/crosscompile-toolchain.cmake \
    -DTOOLCHAIN_PREFIX=$TC/bin/riscv64-buildroot-linux-musl- \
    -DCMAKE_SYSROOT=$TC/riscv64-buildroot-linux-musl/sysroot \
    ..
make            # builds imu_test, collect, train, and infer
```

> `ARCH_NAME=RV64GCV` selects C906 tuning (`-mtune=thead-c906`) and a scalar

Reviewer: I don't think this sentence is necessary; we already said that we are specifying `ARCH_NAME` for this reason before the command, and the bits about what we are doing for the OpenBLAS build aren't really relevant to the reader.

Small phrases like "the board is effectively single-core for this workload" are actually not good to include because they raise a bunch of questions: is this board multi-core?  Why can't we use all the cores?  What is the reason for singlethreadedness?  The answer in this case is that the other core on the board is (I think) running some RTOS for totally different purposes, so we can write that, but then the next follow-up question is, why doesn't the example have support for the RTOS core, why can't mlpack take advantage of it?  Which is a much deeper question.  I think it's better to just leave all this stuff unmentioned.  Anyone who knows that the board is multicore will understand that we are not using the RTOS core without us having to write anything about it, and anyone who doesn't understand is going to be sent down irrelevant rabbit holes by the detail.

I know I have written *way* more than the single sentence I am responding to here.  I think that this sentence was written by Claude, which is not necessarily a bad thing, but Claude doesn't have or understand writer's intent and sometimes I really struggle with the writing it produces since it seems to contain lots of details that aren't actually relevant to the point the text is trying to make.

`RISCV64_GENERIC` OpenBLAS build (no large vector buffers, friendlier on
64 MB), and OpenMP is disabled (the board is effectively single-core for this
workload), check [Annex B](#annex-b-making-openblas-fit-so-training-runs-on-the-device),
for more details regarding OpenBLAS optimization for this specific device.  When
cross-compiling, every binary is linked statically, so nothing needs to be
installed on the device.  You can also build a single program, e.g. `make collect`.

When the build finishes you will have `imu_test`, `collect`, `train`, and
`infer` in the build directory, all static RISC-V binaries:

```sh
file train
# train: ELF 64-bit LSB executable, UCB RISC-V, ... statically linked, stripped
```

### Copying everything to the device

> The Duo's BusyBox userland has no SFTP server, so a plain `scp` fails with
> `sh: /usr/libexec/sftp-server: not found`.  Use scp's legacy protocol with
> `-O`.  Over the Duo's USB-OTG connection the board is usually reachable at
> `192.168.42.1`, you can check that by doing a local ping. The default password
> for the Duo is `milkv`:
> 

Reviewer: I think this also suffers from too many details (there is no need to bring busybox into the picture, and nobody needs to think about what USB-OTG means).  What do you think of this simplification?

```suggestion
We can use `scp` to copy the programs to the Milk-V, but, we have to use the 
`-O` option for the legacy SCP protocol since the Milk-V does not support SFTP.
If you have plugged in your Milk-V via USB, the board should be reachable at 
`192.168.42.1`; you can check that by doing a local ping.  The default password
for the Duo is `milkv`:
```

```sh
scp -O imu_test collect train infer  root@192.168.42.1:/root/

> ssh root@192.168.42.1 'chmod +x /root/imu_test /root/collect /root/train /root/infer'

Reviewer: Are you sure this is needed?  When I scp'ed something executable over, it still had the executable bit on the device.

```

### Running it on the device

SSH into the board.  All the commands below run on the Duo.

1. Check the I2C0 pins and the sensor. The GP0/GP1 pads must be set to
their I2C function first:

```sh

> i2cdetect -y -r 0          # should show devices at 0x1d and 0x6b (and 0x77)

Reviewer: I think that it would be good to print the output we are looking for here, so a user can just compare.

```

This is the step most likely to be missing if the sensor does not respond.
Therefore, you can mux the pins and change their functionality as follows:

```sh
duo-pinmux -p GP0 -f IIC0_SCL
duo-pinmux -p GP1 -f IIC0_SDA
i2cdetect -y -r 0          # Now it should show devices at 0x1d and 0x6b (and 0x77)

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe we should just tell the user to run these duo-pinmux commands regardless of their current setup?  So instead of saying "this is the step most likely to be missing if i2cdetect didn't work", we instead just say "mux the pins and run i2cdetect to see that it's hooked up right"?

2. Check the sensor and calibrate the magnetometer

> Even though we are going to use Accelerometer only. Calibration is important and it is 
> built into `imu_test`; rotate the board through all orientations while it samples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Even though we are going to use the accelerometer only, calibration is important and it is 
built into `imu_test`; rotate the board through all orientations while it samples:
```

But... if we are only using the accelerometer, then why is calibration important?  Does the accelerometer need to be calibrated?  If the accelerometer doesn't need to be calibrated, then why run it at all?

(Also, what are the orientations?  Maybe it makes sense to take a picture of the board in each orientation?  That is, if the step is actually that important.)

```sh
./imu_test --calibrate mag.cal /dev/i2c-0 20
```

3. Collect labelled data.  Each recording is written to its own file named
`<label>_<date>.csv`, so the label is the file name.  The arguments are
positional -- `collect <label> [sensors] [out-dir] [device] [rate-hz]

> [duration-sec] [mag-cal]` -- so here we record accelerometer only, into `data`,

Reviewer: `The arguments are positional` is obvious and not really helpful.  You can just write: use `collect` like this:

```
collect <label> [sensors] [out-dir] [device] [rate-hz] [duration-sec] [mag-cal]
```

> on the default bus, at 100 Hz, for 30 seconds.  Run `collect` once per movement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the default I2C bus, at 100 Hz, for 30 seconds.  Run `collect` once per movement:
```

```sh
mkdir data
./collect walking   accel data /dev/i2c-0 100 30
./collect sitting   accel data /dev/i2c-0 100 30
./collect squat     accel data /dev/i2c-0 100 30
```

Collect several recordings per movement (more files means more training

> windows), keeping the same sensor selection across all of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
windows).
```

I don't think that adds anything other than confusion?  I don't know why anyone would think that they should change the sensor selection.  If you want to keep that, maybe clarify what you mean by "sensor selection"?  Maybe you mean any option to the program including sample rate?

4. Train the network.  `train` groups the CSVs by label, cuts each into
overlapping sliding windows of `window` samples spaced `step` apart (a 50%

> overlap by default), turns each window into features (the per-channel FFT power

Reviewer: This is an example so simplicity is really important: if you aren't specifying `test-split` or `step` in your example below, then drop them as options and just hard-code them in `train.cpp` (maybe up top so it's clear how they can be changed).  Then all you need to write is that 'we have overlapping sliding windows of `window` samples spaced `window / 2` samples apart'.

> spectrum plus per-channel mean, standard deviation, and median), and trains a

Reviewer: I wouldn't use the word "per-channel"; you mean each axis of the accelerometer, right?  I might write "FFT power spectrum, mean, standard deviation, and median for each accelerometer axis".  Although that raises another question: do you mean the mean/SD/median in the time domain or frequency domain?

small `float32` neural network.  Instead of a fixed epoch count it uses early
stopping: the `patience` argument is how many epochs it keeps searching after
the lowest validation loss before stopping.  The arguments are positional --
`train <data-dir> [window] [out-prefix] [patience] [test-split] [step]`:

```sh
./train data 256 model 10
```

It prints a per-epoch loss and a progress bar while training, then a held-out
test accuracy, and writes `model.bin` (the trained network), `model.labels`
(window size, window step, and class names), and `model_scaler.bin` (the
feature scaler, so `infer` standardizes live features the same way training
did).

5. Run live inference.  `infer` reads the IMU, slides the same window over
the stream, runs the same FFT, and prints the predicted movement.  The arguments
are positional -- `infer <sensors> <device> <mag-cal> <model-prefix>
[model-prefix ...]` -- and you must pass the same sensors you trained with (use
`-` for the mag-cal file to skip it):

```sh
./infer accel /dev/i2c-0 - model                  # prints predictions to stdout
```

You can pass more than one model prefix to compare several trained networks on

> the same live stream.

Reviewer: I don't think that functionality is totally necessary for the example and I think you could save a lot of code in the example by removing that.  If the user wants to try with a different network... they can just... try with a different network.  This is not a production application, just a simple demonstration.

### Annex A: shrinking the binary (image and audio support)

When you `#include <mlpack.hpp>`, mlpack's `data::Load`/`data::Save` pull in
support for image files (via the bundled STB libraries) and audio files (via the
bundled dr_libs).  This tutorial only loads CSVs, so that image and audio code is
dead weight. Therefore, disabling it trims roughly 100 KB from the static binary.

mlpack exposes these as [compile-time options](../user/compile.md#configuring-mlpack-with-compile-time-definitions),
and the CMake infrastructure this example uses turns them into flags you can pass
on the command line.  Add them to the configure step from
[Building the programs](#building-the-programs):

```sh
cmake ... -DMLPACK_DISABLE_STB=ON -DMLPACK_DISABLE_DR_LIBS=ON -DMLPACK_DISABLE_HTTPLIB=ON ..

> ```

Reviewer: Why not just add them to the cmake step up above?  Then we don't need this section at all.  I think it would be just fine to inline it there.

does it for you.

In the following we are detailing necessary modification relevant to OpenBLAS
to make it able to run neural network on resource constrained device. The
current default configuration, the neural network training step would freeze when 
we try to run it on the target device. The reason for this is the matrix
multiplication function `GEMM`. By default GEMM allocates an internal buffer
with default `BUFFER_SIZE=32` MB allocated, which we are going to reduce to 8 MB.

In addition to this, we need to reduce the number of columns block treated by
the CPU at one time, since the cache is lower on our device. We need to reduce
this from `SGEMM_DEFAULT_R = 12288` to `2048`.

The above reduction is possible for two reason: the first one is that this 
board has only 28 MB available, and second reason is that all also our matrices
are tiny in this example (e.g., 64 x 297). 

Both reductions are shipped as a patch file that lowers these two values in the
OpenBLAS source before it is built.  It is applied automatically for the riscv64
target, so you normally do nothing; to apply it explicitly (or supply your own),

> pass it to CMake with `-DOPENBLAS_PATCHES=CMake/patches/openblas-riscv64-low-memory.patch`.

Reviewer: I actually am not sure I agree this is the single most important thing---there are lots of other things that could reasonably be claimed to be the most important thing.  I think you could restructure more along these lines:

```
We can use `scp` to copy the programs to the Milk-V, but, we have to use the 
`-O` option for the legacy SCP protocol since the Milk-V does not support SFTP.
If you have plugged in your Milk-V via USB, the board should be reachable at 
`192.168.42.1`; you can check that by doing a local ping.  The default password
for the Duo is `milkv`:

In order to run mlpack on the Milk-V, which has a very small amount of usable 
RAM (only 28MB), we have to modify the underlying OpenBLAS library.  Without 
this modification, the `train` program will not run; this is because the matrix
multiplication functionality in OpenBLAS allocates an internal buffer of size 
32MB---larger than the available RAM.  Therefore, we have to reduce this, along
with the block sizes used during matrix multiplication.

Both of these changes are a part of the example repository, in the file 
[CMake/patches/openblas-riscv64-low-memory.patch](add link to patch here).

The example applies this patch automatically when it calls `mlpack.cmake` to 
download mlpack's dependencies and cross-compile OpenBLAS.
```

What do you think?  Is that missing any pieces that you still wanted to get across?

In addition to this, OpenBLAS is build as a single thread, since the cpu is a
single-core:

`USE_THREAD=0 NUM_THREADS=1 USE_OPENMP=0`:

```cmake
execute_process(COMMAND make TARGET=${OPENBLAS_TARGET} BINARY=${OPENBLAS_BINARY}
    HOSTCC=gcc CC=${CMAKE_C_COMPILER} FC=${CMAKE_FORTRAN_COMPILER}
    NO_SHARED=1 USE_THREAD=0 NUM_THREADS=1 USE_OPENMP=0
    WORKING_DIRECTORY ${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/deps/OpenBLAS-${version})

> ```

Reviewer: I don't think this bit is helpful; mlpack.cmake should do this automatically, and we should set these OPENBLAS_EXTRA_ARGS as part of the architecture in crosscompile-arch-config.cmake.

## On-device movement recognition with an IMU

In this tutorial we build a complete, end-to-end human-movement / activity
recognition pipeline that runs entirely on a tiny RISC-V Linux board. The
pipeline consists of data collection, training, and inference all happen on the target device.
The main target of this tutorial is to provide an end to end example of using mlpack

> on real resource-constrained embedded hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main target of this tutorial is to provide an end-to-end example of using mlpack
on real resource-constrained embedded hardware.  The tutorial can be followed
step-by-step.
```

If you have not cross-compiled mlpack before, read these first:

>  * [Run mlpack bindings on a Raspberry Pi](../embedded/crosscompile_armv7.md)

Reviewer: Do you think this one really needs to be read first?  Maybe it is just a related tutorial, but I don't know if the user has to run `mlpack_knn` on an embedded device to have an idea for this one.  If there are commonalities for setting up the cross-compilation toolchain, maybe we should refactor them into a different documentation page or put them in `supported_boards.md`?

Author: they do not need to run `mlpack_knn`  for sure, but they have some kind of a knowledge of cross compilation, maybe we can ask them to skim this page quickly ? or we can remove this completely it is up to you.

Reviewer: Maybe changing the "read this first" to "see also these other resources on cross-compiling mlpack"?

 * [Cross-compile an mlpack example for embedded hardware](../embedded/crosscompile_example.md)
 * [Cross-compilation setup (toolchains per board)](../embedded/supported_boards.md)

The full source code for this tutorial can be found in the
[mlpack examples repository](https://github.com/mlpack/examples), under
[`cpp/movement_recognition/`](https://github.com/mlpack/examples/tree/master/cpp/movement_recognition).

Contents:

 * [What are we building](#what-are-we-building)
 * [Hardware](#hardware)
 * [Setting up the cross-compilation toolchain](#setting-up-the-cross-compilation-toolchain)
 * [Getting the example](#getting-the-example)
 * [Building the programs](#building-the-programs)
 * [Copying everything to the device](#copying-everything-to-the-device)
 * [Running it on the device](#running-it-on-the-device)
 * [Annex A: shrinking the binary (image and audio support)](#annex-a-shrinking-the-binary-image-and-audio-support)
 * [Annex B: making OpenBLAS fit (so training runs on the device)](#annex-b-making-openblas-fit-so-training-runs-on-the-device)

### What are we building

> We are building a machine learning based human movement recognition pipline to detect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are building a machine learning based human movement recognition pipeline to detect
```

movements such as walking, sitting, squats, and climbing stairs. This
is enabled by using a 9 Degree of Freedom inertial sensor that is read over an I2C bus.
The collected data is cut into windows, and then fed into a Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) in order to extract the features from each collected windows.
Finally, we build a small `float32` neural network, that learns to recognize the

> movements, with the highest possible accuracy. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we build a small `float32` neural network that learns to recognize the
movements with the highest possible accuracy.
```
(superfluous commas)

The example is split into four small independent programs. Each one of them
can be run by the user to do one specific task. It is up to the user to
combine them or integrate such a functionality in their project. Our main

> target is to provide an example on how such a software can be built: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example is split into four small independent programs, each of which
performs a single task:
```

If I'm taking too much away, not a problem, re-add whatever should go back in, but I thought the extra details there might confuse a reader.

Author: Looks good, thanks, I also was not satisfied with my original  phrasing

| Program    | Built from         | Uses mlpack? | Purpose |
|------------|--------------------|:------------:|---------|
| `imu_test` | `driver/`          | no           | sensor check + magnetometer calibration |
| `collect`  | `collect/`         | no           | record sensor data to CSV (small, exception-free) |
| `train`    | `train/train.cpp`  | yes          | train a neural network from the CSVs |

> | `infer`    | `infer/infer.cpp`  | yes          | live inference from the IMU |

Reviewer: I think this is more effective as a simple list with just `program: purpose`.

All three sensor-reading programs share the self-contained driver under
`driver/`, which wraps the whole GY-89 board behind one `SensorBoard` object:
`collect` and `infer` just open it, bring up the selected sensors, and read
whole samples.  `collect` and `imu_test` only need the Linux I2C headers, so

> they compile to ~150–170 KB static binaries; `train` and `infer` link mlpack.

Reviewer: We haven't at all introduced the hardware yet, so a reader is going to have no idea the relevance of "GY-89" board.  Honestly I think the text I've selected here isn't actually helpful towards making any points that are relevant to the tutorial; you've already said, 'we have four programs', for now, we don't need to say any more.

All four are built from one CMake project that uses the same cross-compilation
infrastructure described in the [embedded example tutorial](../embedded/crosscompile_example.md).

The pipeline is: `collect` writes one CSV file per recording (the file name
is the label), `train` turns those CSVs into FFT features and fits a network,

> and `infer` reads the live sensor stream and prints the predicted movement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pipeline is:

 * `collect` writes one CSV file per recording (the file name is the label),
 * `train` turns those CSVs into FFT features and fits a network, and
 * `infer` reads the live sensor stream and prints the predicted movement.
```

This might visually organize it a bit better, see what you think.

Author: make sense to me

The figure below shows that feature pipeline on the real recorded data, from
raw signal to the features the network learns from:

<center>
<img src="../img/movement_fft_pipeline.png" width="520" alt="Movement-recognition FFT feature pipeline: raw recording, overlapping sliding windows, and per-movement FFT power spectra" />
</center>

We show in (a) a `raw recording` for the squat movement only using the accelerometer's three
axes over a few seconds; the vertical axis (`az`) oscillates around 1 g with the movement's rhythm.
(b) `sliding windows` cuts each recording into fixed-length windows that overlap by
half a window (a sliding window with a 50% step): overlap generate more
training windows, creating a higher exposure for each movement. Therefore
increasing the accuracy. (c) `FFT power per movement`, in this figure we show
how FFT is applied per-channel for each window on all the movements in order to
extract the relevant power spectrum. As demonstrated, different movements can
be identified with different frequencies. Note that, the gravity (DC) component
is removed from this plot for clarity. However, is kept part of the features

> space used for training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the figure, 

 * `(a)` "raw recording" shows the accelerometer's three axes over a few seconds
   for a squat movement; the vertical axis (`az`) oscillates around 1g with the
   movement's rhythm.

 * `(b)` "sliding windows" cuts each recording into fixed-length windows that
   overlap by half a window (a sliding window with a 50% step): overlap
   generates more training windows, creating a higher exposure for each
   movement; this increases the accuracy.

 * `(c)` "FFT power per movement" shows how the FFT is applied per-channel for
   each window on all the movements in order to extract the relevant power
   spectrum.  Different movements can be identified with different frequencies.
   Note that, the gravity (DC) component is removed from this plot for clarity.
   However, it is kept as part of the features used for training.
```

What do you think, cleaner as a list?

### Hardware

This tutorial uses a [Milk-V Duo](https://milkv.io/duo), a SOPHGO
CV1800B board with a dual-core RISC-V C906 CPU and 64 MB of RAM (of which
only ~28 MB is usable from Linux), running a musl-based Linux.  The sensor is a

> GY-89 10-DOF breakout, which carries three separate I2C chips:

Reviewer: I read 9-DOF earlier in the tutorial; which is it?  (I'm not sure.)

Author: 3 accel, 3 gyro, 3 magnometer, which makes it 9 degree of freedom plus 1 temperature, and 1 barometer.

Author: depends on we consider it, I would go for 10 because of the barometer, but maybe we should stick to 9 ? I am personally not sure.

Reviewer: I don't have any opinion other than that we should use the same description in both places (I saw 9 being used earlier).

| Chip        | Function                            | 7-bit address |
|-------------|-------------------------------------|---------------|
| L3GD20H | 3-axis gyroscope                    | `0x6B`        |
| LSM303D | 3-axis accelerometer + magnetometer | `0x1D`        |
| BMP180  | barometric pressure + temperature   | `0x77`        |

Wire the GY-89 to the Duo's I2C0 bus (the example defaults to `/dev/i2c-0`):

| GY-89 pin | Milk-V Duo |
|-----------|------------|
| VIN/VCC   | 3V3(OUT), pin 36 |
| GND       | GND, pin 38 |
| SCL       | IIC0_SCL (GP0), pin 1 |

> | SDA       | IIC0_SDA (GP1), pin 2 |

Reviewer: Honestly your figure describes this really well, so I don't know if this particular table is even needed.  I think the image is just fine.

<center>

> <img src="../img/wiring_gy89_duo.png" width="620" alt="Wiring the GY-89 IMU breakout to the Milk-V Duo over I2C0: SCL to pin 1 (GP0), SDA to pin 2 (GP1), VIN to pin 36 (3V3 out), and GND to pin 38" />

Reviewer: Really nice to have the alt-text here (I have a friend who is blind, so, alt-text like this is a lifesaver)

Author: Actually, I am interested to know how this is relevant.

</center>

The Duo is a DIP-style board, so its 40 pins run down the two long edges: pins
1 to 20 top-to-bottom on the left, and pins 40 to 21 top-to-bottom on the
right (pin 1 sits opposite to pin 40, next to the USB-C connector).  The

> 3.3V output and a ground pin are the adjacent pair on the right edge.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this paragraph is necessary, if the image already makes it clear which way the device is oriented.

Author: okay, understood, I will remove it. I wanted to be sure that it is clear, but if it is for you I can get rid of it

> On the Duo those pads / pins default to a different function and must be muxed to I2C.

Reviewer: What is the different function?  Is there a way we could concisely write it?  As a reader I found myself thinking "what is the other function".  Maybe there's not an easy answer, but if it's, say, they are just general GPIOs, we could write "On the Duo pins 1 and 2 are GPIO pins and we must mux them to the I2C controller" (or something like that).

Author: make sense, I will make it more explicit that this is GPIO

This is done on the device with `duo-pinmux` and is shown in

> [Running it on the device](#running-it-on-the-device). Feel free to check
> pinmux software on the Duo to change the functionality of the pins and use a
> different interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Running it on the device](#running-it-on-the-device).  `duo-pinmux` can be used
to change the functionality of each pin on the Duo.
```

The 'feel free to' strikes me as somewhat unusual phrasing; maybe it's better to just indicate that you can do a bunch of stuff with `duo-pinmux`?

Author: this is probably got lost after rewording, if yes please let me know if the current version is not good

Reviewer: I'm not sure that you changed anything here?

### Setting up the cross-compilation toolchain

Since the device is resource constrained with only 28 MB available

> RAM, therefore, we cross-compile on a host `x86_64` machine and copy the static

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RAM, we cross-compile on a host `x86_64` machine and copy the static
```
The "since" already serves the purpose of the "therefore" 😄
